Decaying Rate of Volcanic Inflation near Three Sisters, Oregon, Measured with GPS and InSAR
Authors
Michael Lisowski, Robert McCaffrey, CW Wicks Jr, Daniel Dzurisin
Publication date
2014/12
Journal
AGUFM
Volume
2014
Pages
V41B-4795
Description

A joint analysis of GPS and InSAR measurements from 1992 to 2014 is used to track ongoing volcanic deformation in a broad area 
centered ~6 km west of South Sister Volcano in central Oregon. We use the tdefnode software to model the observed deformation 
with a linear combination of steady background tectonic deformation across the Cascades volcanic arc and time-dependent inflation 
of a buried magma chamber with variable depth and geometry. We find that the observed InSAR interferograms and GPS-measured 
uplift and radially outward displacement of the ground is consistent with that predicted by an exponentially decaying rate of 
inflation within a ~7-km-deep, nearly spherical magma chamber. The main pulse of deformation started sometime in 1998, and the 
rate of deformation has since decayed with an exponential time constant of ~7 years. The post-2001, 3-D displacements measured 
by the continuous and campaign-mode GPS stations only are best-fit by decaying inflation of a slightly shallower 5-km-deep 
prolate spheroid with an aspect ratio of ~1.4. The continuous GPS displacement time series from station HUSB, installed in 
May 2001, provides the clearest evidence for smoothly decaying rate of deformation. This study does not support Riddick and 
Schmidt's (G3, 2011) conclusion, based on 1992-2009 InSAR data only, that the volcanic deformation in this region is best 
fit by a piece-wise linear rate of decay, and it conflicts with their hypothesis that the source of deformation is an inflating 
sill. Our results are consistent with those of Dzurisin and others (JVGR, 2009), which were based on GPS data only.



https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014AGUFM.V41B4795L/abstract

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015AGUFMNH51G..04L/abstract

USGS GNSS Applications to Volcano Disaster Response and Hazard Mitigation

Show affiliations
Lisowski, M.;  McCaffrey, R.
Abstract
Volcanic unrest is often identified by increased rates of seismicity, deformation, or the release of volcanic gases. 
Deformation results when ascending magma accumulates in crustal reservoirs, creates new pathways to the surface, or 
drains from magma reservoirs to feed an eruption. This volcanic deformation is overprinted by deformation from tectonic 
processes. GNSS monitoring of volcanoes captures transient volcanic deformation and steady and transient tectonic 
deformation, and we use the TDEFNODE software to unravel these effects. We apply the technique on portions of the 
Cascades Volcanic arc in central Oregon and in southern Washington that include a deforming volcano. In central Oregon, 
the regional TDEFNODE model consists of several blocks that rotate and deform internally and a decaying inflationary 
volcanic pressure source to reproduce the crustal bulge centered ~5 km west of South Sister. We jointly invert 47 
interferograms that cover the interval from 1992 to 2010, as well as 2001 to 2015 continuous GNSS (cGNSS) and survey-mode 
(sGNSS) time series from stations in and around the Three Sisters, Newberry, and Crater Lake areas. A single, 
smoothly-decaying ~5 km deep spherical or prolate spheroid volcanic pressure source activated around 1998 provides 
the best fit to the combined geodetic data. In southern Washington, GNSS displacement time-series track decaying 
deflation of a ~8 km deep magma reservoir that fed the 2004 to 2008 eruption of Mount St. Helens. That deformation 
reversed when it began to recharge after the eruption ended. Offsets from slow slip events on the Cascadia subduction 
zone punctuate the GNSS displacement time series, and we remove them by estimating source parameters for these events. 
This regional TDEFNODE model extends from Mount Rainier south to Mount Hood, and additional volcanic sources could be 
added if these volcanoes start deforming. Other TDEFNODE regional models are planned for northern Washington (Mount Baker 
and Glacier Peak), northern California (Mount Shasta, Medicine Lake, Lassen Peak), and Long Valley. These models take 
advantage of the data from dense GNSS networks, they provide source parameters for volcanic and tectonic transients, and 
can be used to discriminate possible short- and long-term volcano- tectonic interactions.


Publication: 
American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2015, abstract id. NH51G-04
Pub Date: December 2015 Bibcode: 2015AGUFMNH51G..04L Keywords: 
4306 Multihazards; NATURAL HAZARDS; 4332 Disaster resilience; NATURAL HAZARDS; 4339 Disaster mitigation; 
NATURAL HAZARDS; 4341 Early warning systems; NATURAL HAZARDS
